we've now reached the crunchy bit of the
questions I received about the PhD oral
examination so this question comes from
Meir barley again hi mare who's joined
us from Cairo and she asked me what are
your tips for PhD vie ver preparation
now firstly mayor I've done a whole
podcast on how to prepare for a PhD oral
examination so if you put in my name
Tara Brabazon oral examination into into
Google then you'll get a whole twenty
minute podcast about how to prepare you
for that really scary big event but let
me just give you a bit of a a gig a
summary of what I think is important in
that preparation process first thing I
think it is really important that you
prepare your body and your mind because
it's beyond stressful it's one of the
most stressful things you will ever do
so it is important to think about your
body to continue to breathe don't forget
to breathe
shoulders back head up and really go
into that experience ready to sell your
wares defend who you are and be your
best self so really make sure you've
eaten well you're well hydrated and your
body and your mind I prepared to go into
that process I'll also give you another
crucial tip that may just change your
entire world when you're in the oral
examination write down the question that
the examiners ask you write it down that
has a few great points to it firstly you
don't forget it
secondly you're under a huge amount of
stress so you might start answering the
question and actually forget what the
question was so by writing it down you
have it the other advantage of doing
that is you have to take time to write
it down so it gives you a few precious
moments to think about the answer while
you're writing it down so as a favor to
me when you're in that oral examination
write down the questions also I think
it's very important that you listen to
the question now this seems really
self-evident like Tara listen to the
question like obviously but no you need
to listen to what is being asked rather
than what you think you're being asked
or what you'd like to be asked and also
if you're not sure about what the
examiner is asking you always ask a
follow-up question don't launch into an
answer if you don't know what he or she
is asking you so keep asking questions
until you are clear precisely about what
the answer is so be prepared to pause
and go with the silences don't think you
get a question and you have to
immediately answer it get a question
write it down take a breath pause think
smile you can take 20 or 30 seconds
you're offering a crucial answer in one
of the most important events in your
life take half a minute to think about
the answer no one's going to worry about
that take it at the time don't be afraid
of the silences also feel free to ask
for a break if you're feeling unwell or
you just need to go to the toilet go to
the toilet okay feel free to ask for a
break we always plan those sorts of
things before an examination commences
so trust me the examiners the chair of
the panel have already talked through
possible scenarios so think about that
the second last thing I would say to you
is please do not highlight your script
don't put bloody post-it notes in it
okay have a clean script and don't think
you're going to be allowed to move
around that script too much to find out
the answer because you won't and finally
I would say to you you are a PhD student
and it feels terrible when you're in
that oral examination because you feel
so deeply disempowered
please don't and if anything weird
happens to you in that session you know
racism sexism any sort of intolerance
that you can pick up make sure that you
log that during the oral examination
perhaps even state it to the chair but
make sure you report it afterwards so
remember you are empowered as well it is
your examination and you have rights so
if anything strange happens
please feel free in fact you must log it
with the Dean of Graduate Studies good
luck